Blog post: Why are we redesigning PostHog? (#7227)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/why-redesign.mdx

---

> title: Why are we redesigning PostHog?

Reviewer: The "Why are we" form has some doubt in it. I think we could drop the question mark to exude more confidence
```suggestion
title: Why we're redesigning PostHog
```

Reviewer 2: Agree with above.

date: 2023-11-27
author: ["cory-watilo"]
rootpage: /blog

> featuredImage: ../images/blog/why-redesign/preview-3000.jpg

Reviewer: Nice image you've got there 😀

featuredImageType: full
category: PostHog news
tags:

>   - Product updates

Reviewer 2: I'll mirror some of this and point to it from changelog too. It should be a milestone.

---

> A year ago, [James](/james) and I sat down in a coffee shop in Austin, Texas and had a discussion about what the future of PostHog could look like.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A year ago, [James](/james) and I sat down in a coffee shop in Austin, Texas and had a discussion about what the future of PostHog could look like, literally.
```

> Our current UI has served its purpose, but as we grow as a company, the possibilities of what can be achieved in PostHog have grown – as have our ambitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We realized that while our current UI has served its purpose, the possibilities of what you can do in PostHog have grown – as have our ambitions.
```

Make the user the main focus of the story, remove passive voice, tie the framing to the Austin conversation (because if you don't, it's not relevant).

> We’re launching a reskin this month as the first step in a series of many milestones around the experience of using PostHog. I’d like to share some of the reasoning behind our changes, and the longer-term vision we’re aiming to realize in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We’re launching a redesign this month as the first step in a series of many milestones around the experience of using PostHog. I’d like to share some of the reasoning behind our changes, and the longer-term vision we’re aiming to realize in the future.
```

Can we be consistent is referring to this as a redesign? Bettter than Redesign/Reskin/Refresh/Rebuild.

## Why we're making changes

Sometimes it feels like designers change things for the sake of change. I promise, this is not one of those times. Here's some of the thinking that's gone into it:

### 1. PostHog isn’t product analytics - it’s a platform

> As of this writing, we’re at five products with three more in beta. Interoperability will be a key differentiator for PostHog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PostHog may have launched as a product analytics tool, but now it does _much_ more than that - from surveys and feature flags, to web analytics and session replays. All of these tools interlink with each other and that's part of what sets us apart. 
```

Underlying every query is our new [HogQL querying engine](/docs/hogql). This means it’s now possible to display a graph of users who match a set of criteria, then pivot to watching a playlist of session recordings, then toss those users into a cohort, enable a feature flag, and send them an in-app survey – all stemming from the same underlying query.

> This means PostHog needs to be flexible, visually agnostic, and adaptable to pivot to whatever type of querying is being done.

Reviewer 2: Q: I was planning on writing another piece about Notebooks launching. Do we want that to launch at the same time? Should it be linked/mentioned here, rather than below?

### 2. An experience that sparks joy ✨

We’ve all used web-based products we _love_ and also those that drive us _absolutely insane_. We want to be in the former category. Our goal is to make PostHog feel to product engineers as Figma is for designers, VS Code is for engineers, or Linear is for ~product managers~ everybody.

So what does a better experience look like for product engineers? For starters, dark mode, keyboard shortcuts, better data density, and tools that make it easier for product engineers to do their jobs. But this is just the tip of the iceberg.

> (Alongside this release, we’re also launching a preview of [Notebooks](#), a new platform feature that lets you explore data in an unstructured way.)

Reviewer 3: Agreed - this is just the launch.

### 3. Flexibility

> Some of our customers use all our products. Some only use one or two. The experience should feel like it was designed specifically for however you use PostHog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some teams use all our products. Some only use one or two. The experience should feel like it was designed for however you use PostHog.
```
Think this better supports the pace of this. Up to you.

## The biggest changes you'll see today

> This initial release of our updated UI is largely focused on aesthetic changes, though it does come with some new features.

Reviewer 2: We should be more specific about what those features are here.

> But more importantly, it lays the groundwork for future improvements. **Some things may still feel a bit janky, but there are lots of exciting plans. This is a work in progress, and I hope you'll bear with us as we continue to iterate in the coming months.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But more importantly, it lays the groundwork for future improvements. **Some things may feel a bit janky, because this is a work in progress, but I hope you'll bear with us as we continue to iterate in the coming weeks.**
```

I think it's important we set an ambitious pace, minimize worries and don't rely on amorphous plans when positioning this to users. 

More: It's got rough edges, but will get better quick. 
Less: It's broken in places and we've got some ideas.

Here's some of the design changes (and a few new features) you'll see today:

### 1. Colors, data density, dark mode

_Data density, dark mode, developers._ Now you can see more information on the screen, and it won't make your eyes bleed.

You can change between light, dark, and a mode that will match your system preference under the account menu.

> 

Reviewer: The redesign is also about aligning the PostHog app's design language with that of our brand (website & marketing) – not the most important thing for a user by far, but it's worth mentioning

![PostHog 3000 in dark mode](../images/blog/why-redesign/dark-mode.png)

### 2. New navigation menu grouping

<div class="sm:max-w-sm sm:float-right -mt-12 -mb-12 sm:-ml-8">

![PostHog 3000 nav menu](../images/blog/why-redesign/nav.png)

</div>

The nav menu has now been organized into two main sections: **project & data** and **products**.

**Project & data** includes your dashboards and notebooks, along with the data you're sent to PostHog (like events, people, and properties), and metadata you've added on top (like actions, cohorts, and annotations) – and a live feed of incoming events.

**Products** is the ever-growing list of tools built on top of the PostHog platform.

Once the icons are familiar enough, you may want to hide the text labels. You can do this by dragging the dividing line to the left of the screen (or just double-click it).

In the future, we may add the [ability to customize the nav menu](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/18884) by re-ordering items or hiding products you don't use.

> <div class="clear-both">&nbsp;</div>

Reviewer: What's this for?

### 3. Side panel

The new collapsible side panel is always available on the right side of the screen and is designed to help with whatever you're currently doing.

> - **Notebooks:** Drag almost anything from the main workspace into a notebook so you don't lose it. It's designed to be a scratchpad for data exploration.

Reviewer 2: Notebooks should be introduced before this.

- **In-app docs (seen below):** Clicking any docs link in the product will now open in the side panel, keeping you in the flow of what you're doing.
- **Support:** Get in touch with support without having a model blocking whatever it is you were looking at.

![PostHog 3000 in dark mode](../images/blog/why-redesign/side-panel.gif)

The side panel may also open other panes as necessary – like quick access to settings, or an onboarding checklist if you're new to PostHog.

> ### 4. Notebooks

Reviewer 2: I feel strongly that notebooks should be higher up this list. The most impactful changes for users are: Dark Mode, Notebooks, Side panel, in that order.

> [Notebooks](#) is a large enough feature that it deserves a post of its own, but in short, it's a way to load up multiple insights (and more) onto a single page. As you explore data, keep dragging in more findings until you come to a conclusion. Then share it with your team.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Notebooks](#) is a large enough feature that it has a post of its own, but in short, it's a way to load up multiple insights (and more) onto a single page. As you explore data, keep dragging in more findings until you come to a conclusion. Then share it with your team.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm planning a post on this, next week.

### 5. Toolbar 3000

It's the same toolbar you know and love, except now it doesn't look like it was designed in 2020! (Oh, and it also has dark mode.)

![Toolbar](../images/blog/why-redesign/toolbar.jpg)

### 6. Command bar

Press `Cmd` + `Shift` + `K` to launch the new command bar. Navigate to most of PostHog's built-in features without ever touching your trackpad. (This includes things like generating an API key, creating a dashboard, or switching to dark mode.)

![Command bar](../images/blog/why-redesign/command-bar.jpg)

### 7. Reorganized settings

> Clicking on _project settings_ will now take you to a more organized page of settings.

Reviewer: Reminds me that we should rename the button to just "Settings"

---

## So what's next?

> This reskin is really just the beginning. There's no shortage of ideas of what to work on next. Here are some other experience improvement’s we’re considering:

Reviewer: As a user "There's no shortage of ideas" makes me a bit scared of what will change in the future 😅 I think we should drop it, as the list itself is much better at conveying how we concretely want to improve the product.

> This reskin is really just the beginning. There's no shortage of ideas of what to work on next. Here are some other experience improvement’s we’re considering:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This redesign is really just the beginning. There's no shortage of ideas of what to work on next. Here are some other experience improvement’s we’re considering:
```

![PostHog 3000](../images/blog/why-redesign/3000-ui.png)

### 5. Panels: Actions, meta data, associations

Also in the above mockup, you'll notice the right column explores a few ideas:

- **Actions:** This pane would provide easy access to explore this event in PostHog products. Think of them like macros.
- **Info:** Metadata like the event name, description, tags appear here. The same concept would be used in insights, as well.
- **Associations:** Want to know where an event is used? Quickly jump to insights or dashboards that use it.

### 6. Keyboard shortcuts

This is a given, and will happen soon!

### 7. Better mobile support

Rolled into what we're releasing today is slightly better mobile support for viewing insights. Though we don't ever intend for an entirely mobile-first experience for managing data or creating insights, this data should definitely be more accessible on mobile, and we're working toward that as well.

> 

Reviewer: Would be a good move to solicit feedback here at the end
